the quest for good explanations is i
believe
the basic regulating principle not only
of science but of the enlightenment
generally
it is the feature that distinguishes
those approaches to knowledge from all
others and it implies all those other
conditions for scientific progress i
have discussed
it trivially implies that prediction
alone is insufficient
somewhat less trivially it leads to the
rejection of authority because if we
adopt a theory on authority that means
that we would also have accepted a range
of different theories on authority
and hence it also implies the need for a
tradition of criticism it also implies a
methodological rule a criterion for
reality namely
that we should conclude that a
particular thing is real
if and only if it figures in our best
explanation of something end quote from
david deutsch the beginning of infinity
explanations that transformed the world
page 22-23
welcome to topcast and to episode 105
where today i will be providing a
breakdown of chapter four which is
criteria for reality from the fabric of
reality by david deutsch
now what you heard at the beginning
there was a quote from the beginning of
infinity from chapter one of that book
which contains not only a summary
basically for the motivation of the book
placing this quest for good explanations
at the foundation of our civilization of
the enlightenment but it also contains
an important kernel linking david's two
books together it speaks of a criterion
for reality what it means for something
to be real and this explanation given by
david this criterion is so far as i know
unique to his philosophy and basically
solves a problem at the intersection of
ontology and epistemology or metaphysics
whatever you want to call this thing
this study of existence and i think it
is actually an improvement on what papa
said about realism and existence it's
something i've discussed with people
over the years now many times because it
is something people criticize but we
have to be careful with what david is
saying here
he says that we should conclude that a
thing is real or that a thing exists if
and only if it figures in our best
explanation of something this is the
condition under which we can conclude
its existence if among our best
explanations of the world unicorns
appear nowhere then there is no reason
to conclude they are real that they
exist now does this rule out unicorns
being found in the future of course not
nothing can they may exist we haven't
ruled out their possibility of existing
we are merely saying that we cannot
conclude they exist now given our best
explanations concluding they exist now
would be to use something other than
reason to come to that conclusion but in
day-to-day language we do not need to
preface all claims that a thing exists
or that a thing is real with for example
we can conclude koalas exist because
they feature in our best explanations we
simply say
koalas exist and the rest goes without
saying so two four things we say do not
exist unicorns do not exist and that
means the same thing as we know unicorns
do not exist which means
unicorns do not feature in our best
explanations of reality now it could
turn out that we are wrong about the
existence of unicorns but saying
something like
we don't know if unicorns exist and
thinking that that is the same kind of
claim as we don't know if alien life
exists
confuses problem situations these claims
we don't know if alien life exists and
we don't know if unicorns exist
look kind of similar but actually
they're not symmetrical
our best theories of life seem to
predict
that it will arise if and where it can
but those same theories do not allow us
to predict what particular species will
arise
for example unicorns in other words life
beyond the solar system is postulated as
a reasonable hypothesis by some
precisely because there to exist good
explanations of why life should be
possible beyond the solar system and
this would solve a problem the problem
of earth being uniquely suited in the
universe for life of any kind
again this is not symmetric with
postulating unicorns exist because
postulating the very special case of
unicorns solves no outstanding problem
in science and that's the difference
does the thing solve a problem or not
i've actually made podcasts before about
existence in general and realism go all
the way back to episode 55 for an
episode titled existence where i have a
15-minute discussion about what it means
for something to exist and so i'm going
to be going over some of that material
today but in greater depth from the
perspective of what the fabric of
reality has to say and towards the end
what even popper himself had to say
about all this but this chapter chapter
4 of the fabric of reality is even more
famous among some fans of the book for
another reason it has perhaps the best
refutation of solipsism known and hence
the best defense of realism it is often
claimed in philosophical circles that we
cannot prove we are not in a simulation
or dreaming everything that we
experience moment to moment or another
way to put this is that there is no
experimental test no observation we can
make and hence no scientific explanation
that allows us to falsify the claim that
we exist in a simulation so apparently
both mathematics or logic as well as
science are impotent in the face of
claims that this is all a simulation or
a dream or a deception from an evil
demon this chapter does away with all of
those concerns by revealing that
mathematics and science are not the only
games in town when it comes to
comprehensively refuting bad
explanations like those we will come in
this chapter very quickly to the
supposed hierarchy of academic
disciplines with the certainty of
mathematics supposedly at the pinnacle
scientific claims just a little less
than certain and the supposed mere
matter of taste arguments that exist in
philosophy but let's not steal all of
that thunder right now i've hinted
enough at what's to come in this chapter
and so let's get straight into it
chapter four criteria for reality which
begins with david writing and i quote
the great physicist galileo galilei who
was arguably also the first physicist in
the modern sense made many discoveries
not only in physics itself but also in
the methodology of science he revived
the ancient idea of expressing general
theories about nature in mathematical
form and improved upon it by developing
the method of systematic experimental
testing which characterizes science as
we know it he aptly called such tests
cementi or ordeals he was one of the
first to use telescopes to study
celestial objects and he collected and
analyzed evidence for the heliocentric
theory the theory that the earth moves
in orbit around the sun and spins about
its own axis
end quote and just my brief reflection
on that prior to galileo there was
indeed a dominant school of philosophy
or science or knowledge whatever you
want to call it the intelligentsia that
assumed knowledge came to us
by pure reason alone more than anything
else pure reason namely mathematics
logic the use of the mind without
needing to consult external reality was
perfect
they thought in a way that the physical
world wasn't so it was really a galileo
who began the practice okay the formal
practice of focusing on experiment as
distinguishing between theories it did
of course take papa to begin
constructing the theoretical apparatus
which allowed us to focus on the
philosophy of how exactly all of that
worked and of course today we're brought
to when david deutch explains how all of
that is necessary experimental work is
of course necessary in science but it's
not sufficient
and this in fact interestingly enough
given the existence of things like or
stances like instrumentalism means that
we still have work to do in this area
back to the book and david writes quote
he galileo is best known for his
advocacy of that theory and for the
bitter conflict with the church into
which that advocacy brought him in 1633
the inquisition tried him for heresy and
forced him under the threat of torture
to kneel and read aloud a long abject
recantation saying that he observed
cursed and detested the heliocentric
theory legend has it probably
incorrectly that as he rose to his feet
he muttered the words
meaning and yet it does move despite his
recantation he was convicted and
sentenced to house arrest under which he
remained for the rest of his life
although this punishment was
comparatively lenient it achieved its
purpose handsomely as jacob bronowski
put its quote the result was silence
among catholic scientists everywhere
from then on the effect of the trial and
of the imprisonment was to put a total
stop to the scientific tradition in the
mediterranean and quote that's from the
ascent of man page 218 by jacob bronoski
and just my reflection on that it seems
to me that there in a nutshell so to
speak is why free speech is such an
important or even foundational value
without it
progress ceases the threat of punishment
of coercion of violence can stifle
speech as many have observed i think
this began with jon stewart mill
self-censorship can be of this kind
today there has been a real resurgence
of interest in the issue of free speech
but when some people speak about it they
are almost exclusively focused on that
american set of concerns the first
amendment that says that the government
will not censor or pass laws to prevent
the freedom of speech in other countries
there are similar concerns what laws
might the government pass and put in
place that prevent people freely
expressing themselves but this issue of
government censorship perhaps the only
form of true censorship in the legal
sense is as many philosophers have
observed really only half the story
important as that part of the story is
john stuart mill got there in his work
on liberty so i'll quote a passage from
chapter 2 of on liberty and explain it
here mill wrote quote in respect to all
persons but those whose pecuniary
circumstances make them independent of
the good will of other people
opinion on this subject is as
efficacious as law men might as well be
imprisoned as excluded from the means of
earning their bread end quote so what
he's saying there is that if your
pecuniary interests your job in other
words depends on your saying or not
saying certain things then this is as
efficacious as law if you would lose
your job for saying something then it's
not really like having freedom is it he
goes on quote from mill those whose
bread is already secured and who desire
no favours from men in power or from
bodies of men or from the public have
nothing to fear from the opener vowel of
any opinions but to be ill thought of
and ill-spoken of and this it ought not
to require a very heroic mould to enable
them to bear end quote and so what he's
saying there is that if you've got your
bread secured in other words you've got
enough money and you don't want anything
from other people in power then you're
free to say what you like except that
you might be ill-spoken of how many
people want to put up with social
ostracism we might wonder the state
might very well have no laws against
speech but your community might very
well effectively cut you off a last
quote from mill quote there is no room
for any appeal and misa accordion in
behalf of such persons by the way just
an aside from me administer accordion
that means don't appeal to pity don't
feel sorry for people who won't speak up
for fear of being ostracized and meal
goes on but though we do not now inflict
so much evil on those who think
differently from us as it was formally
our custom to do
it may be that we do ourselves as much
evil as ever by our treatment of them
end quote so
there's the key point
this social thing mill thinks is as
important as the legal thing now this is
very important today facebook twitter
youtube etc should have the legal right
to set their rules and censor although
there is a dispute in the community
about this you know some people think
that the government really should
intervene now i think that that is wrong
that facebook twitter etc whatever
social media company it happens to be
should be perfectly free to on their
platforms set the rules but we also have
to consider the effects of
banning people as they seem to do rather
routinely swiftly and readily with
little recourse and they have the legal
right but on mill's view and those of
others roger scrutin is a more recent
example of arguing for this what tends
to happen is that if those platforms do
become known as they seem to be for
their internal censorship practices
which might be seen as arbitrary and
harsh the effect is
for people to self-censor because they
do not wish to be ostracized from the
community the online community even if
they did not get banned many may not say
what they would prefer to say for fear
of being de-boosted as it's called or
simply poorly treated by their social
media circle so when we've never had
more opportunity to share ideas and
learn knowledge and network we might
likewise simultaneously have a modern
day silencing of a kind by proxy so mill
foresaw this and mill was concerned
about this when he was writing centuries
ago
so if what you're concerned about is
progress then yes any legal imposition
on people being free to speak is
anathema to solving problems and
understanding reality it is preventing
the collision of ideas with each other
as well as with reality this was the
issue galileo had a legal constraint on
what he could say and then a chilling
effect on the rest of the scientific
community but let's be clear that this
is not the only chilling effect that can
occur when it comes to speech there are
real social pressures as well and today
because we have this thing called social
media it may well be amplified my guess
is that any stifling of speech might
well be mitigated today by the fact that
so much more of it is out there and
being amplified but this will have a
selection effect associated with it
especially courageous people or people
of a certain kind let's say of a prickly
nature or people in a position of as
milhinsat personal means will find it
easier to speak out those who work for
wages or a salary might be legally free
to say whatever they like but if your
immediate concern is putting bread on
the table then risking that by speaking
the truth might not be a gamble you will
take
okay back to the book and david writes
how could a dispute about the layout of
the soul system
have such far-reaching consequences and
why did the participants pursue it so
passionately
because the real dispute was not about
whether the solar system had one layout
rather than another it was about
galileo's brilliant advocacy of a new
and dangerous way of thinking about
reality not about the existence of
reality for both galileo and the church
believed in realism the common sense
view that an external physical universe
really does exist and does affect our
senses including senses enhanced by
instruments such as telescopes where
galileo differed was in his conception
of the relationship between physical
reality on the one hand and human ideas
observations and reason on the other he
believed that the universe could be
understood in terms of universal
mathematically formulated laws and that
a reliable knowledge of these laws was
accessible to human beings if they
applied his method of mathematical
formulation and systematic experimental
testing as he put it the book of nature
is written in mathematical symbols this
was in conscious comparison with that
other book on which it was more
conventional to rely end quote now let's
just consider there david's claim that
both galileo and the church believed in
realism this is a commonly misunderstood
point religious people can and often are
in fact realists even people who have
otherwise unscientific beliefs can be
realists it's rather like how religious
people often have a realistic or
objective view of morality they think
there exists a difference in reality
between good and evil and both of those
things really exist but being a realist
of course does not make you invaluable
you can still make errors in fact you
would expect to make errors because you
understand there is an objective reality
out there about which you can be wrong
so the thing about religious people on
this account
christians of this kind that for example
galileo is debating against they don't
fall for the it's all a dream argument
and logically equivalent claims but of
course that doesn't mean that what they
think is real actually is real let's go
back to the book and david writes
galileo understood that if his method
was indeed reliable then wherever it was
applicable its conclusions had to be
preferable to those obtained by any
other method therefore he insisted that
scientific reasoning took precedence not
only over intuition and common sense but
also over religious doctrine and
revelation it was specifically that idea
and not the heliocentric theory as such
that the authorities considered
dangerous and they were right for if any
idea can be said to have initiated the
scientific revolution and the
enlightenment and to have provided the
secular foundation of modern
civilization it is that one it was
forbidden to hold or defend the
heliocentric theory as an explanation of
the appearance of the night sky but
using the heliocentric theory writing
about it holding it as a mathematical
supposition or defending it as a method
of making predictions they were all
permitted that was why galileo's
dialogue of the two chief world systems
which compared the heliocentric theory
with the official geocentric theory had
been cleared for printing by church
censors the pope had even acquiesced in
advance to galileo's writing such a book
though at the trial a misleading
document was produced claiming that
galileo had been forbidden to discuss
the issue at all it is an interesting
historical footnote that in galileo's
time it was not yet indisputable that
the heliocentric theory gave better
predictions than the geocentric theory
the available observations were not very
accurate ad hoc modifications had been
proposed to improve the accuracy of the
geocentric theory and it was hard to
quantify the predictive powers of the
two rival theories these are just end
quote there just my reflection list
these ad hoc modifications to the
geocentric theory were basically well if
you consider what the geocentric theory
was all about you have the earth the
center and then all the other celestial
bodies are going around the earth now if
you just assume that they're moving in
circles around the earth then the
predictions that the geocentric theory
makes over time tend to move out of sync
with what's going what's going on in
reality so what you do is instead of
having the celestial objects like the
sun and the moon and the other planets
moving in circles around the earth you
have them moving in slightly more
complicated motions where you have well
what is called a circle on a circle or
an epicycle so you have the planets for
example
doing little circles as
they're going around the sun they're
moving in circles on the circular orbits
and then if you need to have further
epicycles circle circular orbits on
circular orbits on circular orbits you
can do that as well but it's ad hoc
because you can just keep adding on
these epicycles there's no reason for
postulating the reality of these things
other than to try and match what's
really going on in reality let's go back
to the book david writes furthermore
when it comes to the details there is
more than one heliocentric theory
galileo believed that the planets move
in circles while in fact their orbits
are very nearly ellipses so the data did
not fit the particular heliocentric
theory that galileo was defending either
so much then for his having been
convinced by accumulated observations
but for all that the church took no
position on this controversy the
inquisition did not care where the
planets appeared to be what they cared
about was reality they cared where the
planets really were and they wanted to
understand the planets through
explanations just as galileo did
instrumentalists and positivists would
say that since the church was perfectly
willing to accept galileo's
observational predictions further
argument between them was pointless and
his muttering epure si mueve was
strictly meaningless but galileo knew
better and so did the inquisition when
they denied the reliability of
scientific knowledge it was precisely
the explanatory part of that knowledge
that they had in mind their worldview
was false but it was not illogical
admittedly they believed in revelation
and traditional authority as sources of
reliable knowledge but they also had an
independent reason for criticizing the
reliability of knowledge obtained by
galileo's methods they could simply
point out that no amount of observation
or argument can ever prove that one
explanation of a physical phenomena is
true and another false as they would put
it god could produce the same observed
effects in an infinity of different ways
so it is pure vanity and arrogance to
claim to possess a way of knowing merely
through
one's own fallible observation and
reason which way he god chose to some
extent they were merely arguing for
modesty for a recognition of human
fallibility and if galileo was claiming
that the heliocentric theory was somehow
proven or nearly so in some inductive
sense they had a point if galileo
thought that his methods could confer on
any theory and authority comparable to
which the church claimed for its
doctrines they were right to criticize
him as arrogant or as they would have
put it blasphemous though of course by
the same standard they were much more
arrogant themselves so how can we defend
galileo against the inquisition what
should galileo's defense have been in
the face of this charge of claiming too
much when he claimed that scientific
theories contain reliable knowledge of
reality the popularian defense of
science as a process of problem solving
and explanation seeking is not
sufficient in itself for the church too
was primarily interested in explanations
and not predictions and it was quite
willing to let galileo solve problems
using any theory he chose it was just
that they did not accept galileo
solutions which they would call mere
mathematical hypotheses had any bearing
on physical reality problem solving
after all is a process that takes place
entirely within human minds so galileo
may have seen the world as a book in
which the laws of nature are written in
mathematical symbols but that is
strictly a metaphor there are no
explanations in orbit out there with the
planets the fact is that all our
problems and solutions are located
within ourselves having been created by
ourselves when we solve problems in
science we arrive through argument at
theories whose explanations seem best to
us pausing there going back let's just
read that again because it's important
to keep that front of mind when we're
considering the world view of david
deutsch coming from poppa i'll say it
again quote from david
the fact is that all our problems and
solutions are located within ourselves
isn't that wonderful so that's saying
that there's no way of deriving anything
from outside the only purpose for
referring to external reality is to
decide between those things within
yourself the problem within yourself and
the solution you conjecture within
yourself
the purpose of observation is to check
which of the solutions really do
solve the problem that you have or
another way of putting that is which of
the explanations that you conjecture
actually turn out to be go unrefuted and
the other ones go refuted by the
observation that you make so let's go on
david writes again when we solve
problems in science we arrive through
argument at theories whose explanation
seem best to us
so without in any way denying that it is
right and proper and useful for us to
solve problems the inquisition and
modern skeptics might legitimately ask
what scientific problem solving has to
do with reality we may find our best
explanations psychologically satisfying
we may find them helpful in making
predictions we certainly find them
essential in every area of technological
creativity all this does justify our
continuing to seek them and to use them
in those ways but why should we be
obliged to take them as fact the
proposition that the inquisition forced
galileo to endorse was in effect this
that the earth is in fact at rest with
the sun and planets in motion around it
but that the paths on which these
astronomical bodies travel are laid out
in a complex way when viewed from the
vantage point of earth is also
consistent with the sun being at rest
and the earth and the planets being in
motion let me call that the inquisitions
theory of the solar system if the
inquisition's theory were true we should
still expect the heliocentric theory to
make accurate predictions of the results
of all earth-based astronomical
observations even though it would be
factually false it would therefore seem
that any observations that appear to
support the heliocentric theory lend
equal support to the inquisition's
theory okay pausing there my reflection
so the thing here is and this is a theme
that runs through the philosophy of
david deutch throughout both of his
books is that using observations to
support your theory
is a dead end
because
inconsistent theories can be regarded as
containing the same amount of support
given a certain amount of observations
here we see an example of this almost
any observation we make of the sky
is going to support this geocentric
theory after all you can walk outside
right now and plot the position of the
celestial objects in the sky including
the sun over the course of a 24-hour
period and those observations are going
to be using your naked eye consistent
with geocentrism they're going to
support geocentrism because if if what
you think the project of science is
about is supporting a particular theory
with ever more accumulated evidence
you're going to succeed in being able to
support that theory false though it is
and indeed you can use such a theory
this geocentric theory in order to
predict the position of these celestial
bodies on the sky day after day after
day you can make extremely accurate
predictions of where the sun's going to
be tomorrow in the sky
if you assume that the earth is at the
center if all you're interested in is
supporting particular theories and
making predictions you can rely upon
known to be false explanations in fact
you don't really have to be concerned
about explanations at all to begin with
because if what you're really after are
predictions and this is david deutsch's
deep point about the project of science
so we need to be focused on explanations
if we are realists we can concede that
not everyone's a realist but that
doesn't prevent us from remaining
committed to the project of science as
being about good explanations because we
want to come to a deeper and deeper
understanding of the reality that we
inhabit we are not primarily concerned
in any area or outside of science in
predicting what's going to happen next
in the special case of science yes we
are but it's only a small part of the
scientific project after all if we
consider the entire science of biology
sometimes what we're interested in is
how exactly species arise over time
evolution by natural selection is an
explanation of the biological diversity
that we see however simultaneously it
doesn't allow you necessarily to make
accurate predictions about what species
will arise next in fact it tells you why
that project of trying to explain the
direction of evolution is a fool's
errand because as we like to say
evolution by natural selection is a
blind process it cannot see ahead as to
how life will change over time given a
change in conditions in ecosystems and
niches that life might evolve into might
adapt itself towards so i'm skipping a
apart
david talks about how the fact well
there's no way in which we could rule
out using experiment a theory like for
example that the earth is just at the
center of a ginormous planetarium and
that planetarium was giving us apparent
feedback that was consistent with a
heliocentric theory this is the
simulation argument in disguise this
idea that there might be this hugely
complicated entity that is giving us the
appearance of realism and external
reality but which actually forms the
border between what we experience as
reality and outside of that thing being
something that we have no access to so
i'm skipping that and i'll just pick it
up where david writes quote to us the
inquisition's theory looks hopelessly
contrived why should we accept such a
complicated and ad hoc account of why
the sky looks as it does when the
unadorned heliocentric cosmology does
the same job with less fuss we may cite
the principle of occam's razor do not
multiply entities beyond necessity or as
i prefer to put it do not complicate
explanations beyond necessity because if
you do the unnecessary complications
themselves remain unexplained however
whether an explanation is or is not
contrived or unnecessarily complicated
depends on all the other ideas and
explanations that make up one's world
view the inquisition would have argued
that the idea of the earth moving is an
unnecessary complication it contradicts
common sense it contradicts scripture
and they would have said there is a
perfectly good explanation that does
without it but is there does the
inquisition's theory really provide
alternative explanations without having
to introduce the counterintuitive
complication of the heliocentric system
just pausing down my reflection so today
using the best explanation of
epistemology and the philosophy of
science given to us in the beginning of
infinity we would say that heliocentrism
is the hard to vary explanation while
geocentrism in order to continue to make
more and more accurate predictions had
to be easy to vary it had to allow the
adding on of more epic cycles whenever
the predictions were out by a certain
amount adding epicycles is an easy
variation however it's very difficult to
vary heliocentrism in the same way let's
go back to the book and david writes
quote let us take a closer look at how
the inquisition's theory explains things
it explains the apparent stationarity of
the earth by saying that it is
stationary so far so good on the face of
it that explanation is better than
galileo's for he had to work very hard
and contradict some common sense notions
of force and inertia to explain why we
do not feel the earth move but how does
the inquisition theory cope with the
more difficult task of explaining
planetary motions the heliocentric
theory explains them by saying that the
planets are seen to move in complicated
loops across the sky
because they are really moving in simple
circles or ellipses in space but the
earth is moving as well the
inquisition's explanation is that the
planets are seen to move in complicated
loops because they are really moving in
complicated loops in space but and here
according to the inquisition's theory
comes the essence of the explanation
this complicated motion is governed by a
simple underlying principle namely that
the planets move in such a way that when
viewed from earth they appear just as
they would if they and the earth were in
simple orbits around the sun to
understand the planetary motions in
terms of the inquisition's theory it is
essential that one should understand
this principle for the constraints it
imposes are the basis of every detailed
explanation that one can make under the
theory for example if one were asked why
a planetary conjunction occurred on such
and such a date or why a planet
backtracked across the sky in a loop of
a particular shape the answer would
always be because that is how it would
look if the heliocentric theory were
true so here is the cosmology the
inquisitions cosmology that can be
understood only in terms of a different
cosmology the heliocentric theory that
it contradicts but faithfully mimics
pausing there my reflection so as we
might say
of this theory using this argument
namely the inquisitions theory the
geocentric theory taken seriously this
version of the geocentric theory simply
is heliocentrism with some additional
assumptions namely that everything
appears to be consistent entirely and
explained well by heliocentrism except
we're going to add the assumption that
heliocentrism is not actually true and
geocentrism is true but otherwise
everything else works out the same all
the predictions that one makes is
perfectly consistent with heliocentrism
being true but we're just going to tack
on this negation of the entire theory
that although it does appear to be true
and appear to be the best explanation
we're going to nonetheless regarded as
axiomatically false because geocentrism
we just take as dogmatically the truth
about our cosmology and i'm skipping
apart and i'll just pick it up where
david says on this exact point quote
therefore we are right to regard the
inquisition's theory as a convoluted
elaboration of the heliocentric theory
rather than vice versa we have arrived
at this conclusion not by judging the
inquisition's theory against modern
cosmology which would have been a
circular argument but by insisting on
taking the inquisition's theory
seriously in its own terms as an
explanation of the world i've mentioned
the grass cure theory which can be ruled
out without experimental testing because
it contained no explanation here we have
a theory which can also be ruled out
without experimental testing because it
contains a bad explanation an
explanation which in its own terms is
worse than its rival pausing there just
my reflection yes so what we're saying
here is we have two theories both of
them make exactly the same predictions
one of them is simpler than the other
namely heliocentrism is simpler than the
geocentric theory as presented here
because the geocentric theory assumes
that all the positions of the planets
that we observe are perfectly consistent
with heliocentrism except it's not true
so it is as we say heliocentrism plus
this additional assumption of it not
being true and david goes on to say
quote as i have said the inquisition
were realists yet their theory has this
in common with solipsism both of them
draw an arbitrary boundary beyond which
they claim human reason has no access or
at least beyond which problem solving is
no path to understanding for solipsists
the boundary tightly encloses their own
brains or perhaps just their abstract
minds or incorporeal souls for the
inquisition it enclosed the entire earth
some present day creationists believe in
a similar boundary not in space but in
time for they believe that the universe
was created only six thousand years ago
complete with misleading evidence of
earlier events pausing there just my
reflection on this we might well add to
this any of the modern incantations of
solipsism one of which is well this is
all a simulation of some kind or other
including the so-called simulation
argument from bostrom it stands on the
same logical footing as these ideas
about solipsism it postulates a reality
beyond which we have no access
experimentally scientifically and
perhaps even using our reason what we
say is that the only thing we have
access to are the contents of the
simulation or the dream or the
deceptions that are going on caused by
the evil demon whatever it happens to be
if it is a simulation if we are living
in a computer simulation that it
postulates a world outside the one we
are experiencing in which the computer
on which this reality we experience is
running but we don't have access to that
computer or the universe in which that
computer actually exists it's
postulating a metaphysical reality on
the same footing as whatever is doing
the dreaming in which whatever the
entity is presumably it's you if you're
dreaming all of this in which that
entity exists as david says on this
point after i skip another uh paragraph
he writes quote there is a large class
of related theories here but we can
usefully regard them all as variants of
solipsism they differ in where they draw
the boundary of reality or the boundary
of that part of reality which is
comprehensible through problem-solving
and they differ in whether and how they
seek knowledge outside that boundary but
they all consider scientific rationality
and other problem solving to be
inapplicable outside the boundary a mere
game they might concede that it can be a
satisfying and useful game but it is
nevertheless only a game from which no
valid conclusion can be drawn about the
reality outside end quote yes so as i
say
these other versions of solipsism you
know the one that one that says that
you're dreaming all of this into
existence or that you and a friend are
dreaming all of this into existence or
that all conscious creatures on planet
earth are dreaming reality into
existence plato's cave was one of the
earliest versions of this that because
we don't have direct access to
reality we might be utterly deceived
about the true nature of reality in some
way or other descartes came along and
talked about how a demon could be
deceiving us and so this led him down a
route of his so-called method of doubt
the movie the movie series the matrix
and the simulation arguments it's all
the same all these things are versions
of solipsism perhaps no philosopher is
more closely
associated with solipsism than descartes
because descartes had this idea
that there was one thing that could not
be doubted and that is the individual's
own mind the existence of their own mind
and and he said it was basically a
logical necessity if you read the
meditations he doesn't really regard it
as an argument he says it's a necessary
truth i think i am is true
whenever i think it now i used to buy
this i used to think yes this is the
only thing that we cannot doubt if
you're thinking then therefore you exist
but as david says
in the fabric of reality in the very
next paragraph i'm about to read this
entails taking on board a whole bunch
more things that one regards as being
absolutely true let's just read what
david says here quote despite descartes
desire to base his philosophy on this
supposedly firm foundation he actually
allowed himself many other assumptions
and was certainly no solipsist end quote
so what did what does david mean by
these
many other assumptions what i think is
meant here is if you're going to argue
in the same way that descartes did that
i think i am as a necessary truth or as
it's usually rendered and i think he
said this elsewhere cogito ergo sum
which is i think therefore i exist so
that sort of suggests that it's kind of
an argument whereas i think david
whereas i think descartes in the
meditations was actually saying it's
just a necessary truth it's just if you
if you are able to think those words i
think or i exist or something you can
think anything at all then you exist you
necessarily exist but whatever the case
you're formulating those thoughts in
language so therefore you think the
language renders reality perfectly well
so not only do you think that this
captures a necessary truth a firm
foundation on which to base everything
else you're also thinking the language
is inherent as well it's able to capture
your thoughts inherently which means
that you'll you cannot possibly be
mistaken about the meanings of words or
what the letters that make up the words
happen to be there's a whole bunch that
you're admitting are also equally true
as the claim i think therefore i exist
if i think therefore i exist is your
foundational truth then that amounts to
an argument so you're thinking that
logic is perfectly inerrant you're
thinking that language is perfectly
inerrant you're thinking that what you
think now is equivalent to what you
think in the future that these words
like exist for example label a concept
which also you cannot be mistaken about
so there's rather much that you're
claiming to not possibly be mistaken
about when you say there's only one
thing that i think i cannot be mistaken
about namely that i exist well if you
truly think that then you're also trying
to say that you can't possibly be
mistaken about the word i the word
exists what i exist the conjunction of
those two things means what the letters
in those words mean what the noises
coming out of your mouth mean or what
the supposed thought in your head really
means so you're
arguing for
a vast ensemble of things that you think
you are infallible about but if we're
falliblists we can reject all of that
and we can say well we could still be
mistaken about any one of those things
because that's the nature of creating
knowledge that we have it's error prone
and we could be wrong about it it's not
to say that you don't exist by the way
it's just to say that you
can't be absolutely 100 certain that you
exist that's all that's all we're saying
that there there's a possibility now
even if you can't think of a way in
which you might be mistaken that's no
refutation of the fact that you could be
mistaken as i like to say your inability
to imagine how you might be mistaken is
not a refutation of the fact that you
could be mistaken it just means you have
a poor imagination or an insufficiently
good imagination to imagine all the ways
in which you might be mistaken you are
fallible after all okay so let's go to
the part of the chapter where david is
refuting solipsism not by experiment not
biological proof but by argument if we
take solipsism seriously what it's
saying is basically your dreaming things
into existence so you're the only person
that exists and everything you
experience all of reality is nothing but
a product of your dreaming you are born
dreaming you're dreaming now and you
will die dreaming so the external
reality none of it really truly exists
it's just part of your dream what's
wrong with this well let's read what
david says about this quote if there are
sources of ideas that behave as if they
were independent of oneself then they
necessarily are independent of oneself
for if i define myself as the conscious
entity that has the thoughts and
feelings i am aware of having then the
dream people i seem to interact with are
by definition something other than that
narrowly defined self and so i must
concede that something other than myself
exists pausing there my reflection and
so this is the beginning of the
refutation of solipsism
namely that if you're dreaming into
existence a reality which is
independently so complex as to be
unpredictable by yourself by your
dreaming self then those other entities
are indeed real real in the sense that
they appear in whatever way you're going
to explain this dream like reality
everything you're interacting with is a
source of an idea or a a prompt an
observation another person might be a
source of an idea as well so some of the
ideas are not coming from inside you but
you're getting them from other people
that you're interacting with and if
they're just a product of your mind if
these other people are a product of your
mind then that's a rather unusual way of
defining oneself not only as the source
of particular ideas about those people
but those people as being sources of
ideas that are not you so your conscious
self
is
not really all that you are what you are
is your conscious self and then all
these other entities that you're
interacting with the dream people that
you interact with on a daily basis as
david goes on to say quote my only other
option if i were a committed solipsist
would be to regard the dream people as
creations of my unconscious mind and
therefore as part of myself in a looser
sense but then i should be forced to
concede that myself had a very rich
structure most of which is independent
of my conscious self within that
structure are entities dream people who
despite being mere constituents of the
mind of a supposed solipsist behave
exactly as if they were committed
anti-solipsists
so i could not call myself holy a
solipsist for only my narrowly defined
self would take that view many
apparently most of the opinions held
within my mind as a whole would oppose
solipsism paul said my reflection so
what's he saying here saying here that
if you're really truly going to try and
believe that you're a solipsist in other
words you're the only thing that exists
in reality and everything is being
dreamed into existence most of that
reality that's being dreamed into
existence consists of well the people in
that reality hold the view that
solipsism is not true and so you if
you're dreaming all of this into
existence
primarily consists of
ideas
minds that object to your apparent
belief in solipsism they're the ones
they're the people you're going to
interact with who are going to say
you're foolish with believing that
you're a solipsist after all here am i
supposedly part of you part of your
dream that is telling you solipsism is
false
how to square that circle that most of
you most of your mind actually rejects
solipsism because after all your mind
also consists of the dream people isn't
that bizarre david goes on to say quote
i could study the outer region of myself
and find that it seems to obey certain
laws the same laws as the dream
textbooks say apply to what they call
the physical universe i would find that
there is far more of the outer region
than the inner region aside from
containing more ideas it is also more
complex more varied and has more
measurable variables by a literally
astronomical factor than the inner
region moreover this outer region is
amenable to scientific study using the
methods of galileo because i have now
been forced to define that region as
part of myself solipsism no longer has
any argument against the validity of
such study which is now defined as no
more than a form of introspection
pausing here my reflection that's
basically it okay that's the refutation
solipsism basically begins by saying
it's all a dream but taken seriously the
contents of the dream act unpredictably
in many cases autonomously and the
physical world can even be studied so
basically nothing has changed except the
addition of a useless assumption namely
the assumption that it's all a dream
jaron lanier makes this point in a
particular discussion i'm linking to
here i'll put that up on the screen and
in the notes of the podcast that yeah
this is a closer to truth interview he
has and he talks about the simulation
argument you know basically a form of
solipsism where he says well look if
science still works under this
metaphysical assumption of it all being
simulated or dreamed then what does its
assimilation actually add to our
understanding of reality again this
whole simulation dream thing is refuted
not by a mathematical or logical
disprove of the hypothesis nor by any
experimental evidence but rather
something in a sense way more compelling
a philosophical argument that the
simulation or solipsism claim is a bad
explanation we should notice in
beginning of infinity terms it's easy to
vary after all this solipsism claim this
claim that one person has dreamed and
could easily be varied to and and
maintain all the same predictions by
saying that two such people are dreaming
three pick your number of people are
dreaming this reality into existence or
the number of computers on which it's
being simulated or the number of demons
deceiving people into thinking this is
true and so on and so forth all of these
different ways of denying
basic realism
are easy to vary and therefore bad
explanations and can be rejected on that
basis david goes on to say quote thus we
see that if we take solipsism seriously
if we assume that it is true
and that all valid explanations must
scrupulously conform to it itself
destructs
how exactly does solipsism taken
seriously differ from its common sense
rival realism the difference is based on
no more than a renaming scheme solipsism
insists on referring to objectively
different things such as external
reality and my unconscious mind or
introspection and scientific observation
by the same names but then it has to
reintroduce the distinction through
explanations in terms of something like
the outer part of myself but no such
extra explanations would be necessary
without its insistence on an
inexplicable renaming scam solipsism
must also postulate the existence of an
additional class of processes invisible
inexplicable processes which give the
mind the illusion of living in an
external reality the solipsist who
believes that nothing exists other than
the contents of one mind must also
believe that the mind is a phenomenon of
greater multiplicity than as normally
supposed it contains other people like
thoughts planet-like thoughts and laws
of physics-like thoughts these thoughts
are real they develop in a complex way
or pretend to and they have enough
autonomy to surprise disappoint enliven
or thwart that other class of thoughts
which call themselves i thus the
solipsists explanation of the world is
in terms of interacting thoughts rather
than interacting objects but those
thoughts are real and interact according
to the same rules that the realist says
govern the interaction of objects thus
solipsism far from being a worldview
stripped to its essentials is actually
just realism disguised and weighed down
by additional unnecessary assumptions
worthless baggage introduced only to be
explained away
pausing there my reflection i just love
that line it's probably one of my
favorite lines and all the fabric of
reality this idea of the additional
unnecessary assumptions being worthless
baggage introduced only to be explained
away i've probably repurposed or
rephrased it a number of times over the
years in response to various different
kinds of anti-realist metaphysical
claims and bad philosophy and bad
explanations so that refutation of
solipsism and all similar arguments is
basically where i'm going to finish it
today okay i'll read one more paragraph
because i think that this is one of the
most powerful and in my experience most
talked about parts of the fabric of
reality that here we have a refutation
and an argument that shows the poverty
of these anti-realistic arguments you
know you go along to a philosophy
lecture at university and eventually you
come across usually it comes via daycare
this idea that it might all be a dream
that what is really real and you get
into these deep philosophical arguments
and you are told there's no way that
science can disprove this or no way that
usually it's put in those kind of terms
you know there's no scientific evidence
that you can bring forth to show that
it's not all a dream but who cares who
cares about the fact there's no
scientific evidence to show that this is
false that's to privilege a particular
way of refuting bad ideas there's a
better way in this in this circumstance
certainly the better way is to reveal
the poverty of the explanation that is
solipsism or the simulation argument to
say
look it's basically just realism plus
additional unnecessary assumptions that
don't help us to understand reality any
better and if you assume that it's all
going on in your mind then you're
assuming that your mind is just equally
as complex as what realism says the
physical world happens to be it's just
that you're saying it's not really a
physical world it's all in my head but
then this raises all sorts of questions
about what's really going on in your
head if we take it seriously then
reality is just reality it's just that
it's in your head but how and why and so
on and so forth become questions that
would need to be asked if we were to
take this seriously so we refute it not
by experiment not by logical disprove
but simply by philosophical argument as
david goes on to say in the last
paragraph that i read quote by this
argument we can dispense with solipsism
and all the related theories they are
all indefensible
incidentally we have rejected one
worldview on these grounds namely
positivism the theory that all
statements other than those describing
or predicting observations are
meaningless as i remarked in chapter one
positivism asserts its own
meaninglessness and therefore cannot be
consistently defended so we can continue
reassured with common sense realism and
the pursuit of explanations by
scientific methods end quote and in the
next episode i'll introduce popper into
the mix i'll bring popper into the mix
as well because papa wrote about realism
common sense realism in objective
knowledge and it comes to bear directly
on this but for now until next time bye
um
[Music]
so
up
[Music]